we're not going to bury the makeup of the student
body now as far as you know in terms of the students
background and their major there is no
difference between urban kids and country kids
and their participation and ag majors and
engineers and so forth is there no We're working on
trying to put together the databases where we can
combine all the different things that we do into
one database and see how people participate to get
a better feel for that. My guess is we're reaching
in all our different programs about 90% of the
student body at least one time a year. If
you look at our most active people, Some of them
come from inner city Houston, some of them come
from far. There's nothing out there that some of
the most active people that we have today didn't
participate in sports at all in high school. Some
of them played all the
time. Our mission right now is really, and the
mission statement's sitting there on my desk, but
this is how I paraphrase it. Our job is to give our
students, primarily the 18 to 22 year olds, the
opportunity to experience a lot of different
kinds of things. We want them to build an active,
healthy lifestyle. That's our mission, and the
way we do that is by providing the opportunities.
and for us to be successful we have to provide a lot
of different opportunities that's why our
program is comprehensive
uh what about uh minority students or we if you look
at the makeup of the people who participate in our
programs uh we're we have more it's pretty close to
the same makeup as the university But in reality,
we have more African Americans, more Hispanics,
more American Indians, more women than the
student body. Per capita. Yeah, per capita. The
only place for short is in white males, which is
kind of interesting. Have there been any teams in
any of the competition which are minority or
international that you know of? yes especially
you know especially in soccer we have a lot of
international soccer and they win they usually
win they get a little frustrated with the way we
officiate because we officiate the way americans
officiate soccer and they want us to officiate the
way internationals soccer is officiated but they
can still win they're good enough to still win it's
uh I suppose the other area that this facility has
helped accommodate, and this is, I think, a pretty
good anecdote, is the international student.
Because, for instance, we had two hours a week
where you could play badminton free play before we
moved in here. Now you could anytime the
building's open. But the sports that are favored
by the international students are all
accommodated in this building badminton
volleyball soccer table tennis it's here and it's
here all the time
the of the first 25 bricks we sold and they're
welcome champions three of those were
international students that's surprising this
especially on friday nights this is a home away
from home you know they they don't can't go home
every weekend like some of our students can but
this is their home away from home. They've enjoyed
it, they've really taken an active part in this
building. Now, I would assume that table tennis or
ping pong, which is it called today? Table tennis.
Table tennis. I would assume that table tennis
might be very keen interest to some international
students. What are some, are there some other
sports that you mentioned? Let's see, what else
that are particularly attractive to
international? Soccer. Soccer. And there's a
wide variety. a number of countries that are
really competitive in soccer. Volleyball is big
with the international students. Badminton,
especially the English and the Indians really
like badminton. You'll see a lot of people playing
badminton anytime the building's open. It's
amazing how many badminton players there are.
Squash is European and Asian.
And my brain's not recovering the name of the
English baseball. Cricket. Cricket. Do we play
cricket now? We had a cricket sports club one time.
There's some people here that play cricket, but we
don't have a facility for it right now. And we don't
play Australian football. No. That looks too
dangerous to me. What about, do we play rugby? Yes.
Rugby is a sports club. We have 29 teams that
participate as if they were varsity teams. The
only difference is their funding level for those
29 teams is about $80,000 a year. so they're
funding a lot they they they're supported
primarily by funds out of their own pocket to
participate but rugby is one of those and lacrosse
there's several of the sports that are fairly
competitive contact organizations are there
some sports that have been requested that you all
have not accommodated uh boxing We've worked a
little bit with boxing, but in reality, that's a
really tough one to manage. It's really too easy to
get hurt there. Any others?
Pushball. We had an incident in pushball probably
the second or third year I was here. And the way push
ball is, this giant ball is about eight foot in
diameter and it's filled with air.
On the surface it doesn't seem like it's a
dangerous game, but just teams line up and you
decide to try to push it across the other person's
field. The way the Corps used to play it is they
would start on the goal line with the ball on the 50
yard line and they'd run to the ball. Of course,
what happens is you get this huge pressure exerted
on one side and you almost get a kickback effect. We
had a gentleman hurt pretty severely in one of
those games. There's other ways to enjoy sport
besides something that can be sedentary. So we
kind of eliminated push ball. I can't think of any
others. As the years went on, what about the Corps
involvement and interest in intramurals? Did it
remain strong or did it decline? The
interest has always been very strong. What we've
tried to do with the Corps achieve a balance
because they are looking at a more balanced
approach. They want people to participate in
sports. They want them to be competitive. They
want them to understand competition in sports.
But they also want them to compete in the
classroom. They want them to get grades that are
good enough to get a graduation, get out of here. So
they try to balance that. At one time, I think we had
gone, there's a course on a point system. and
they're competing for, part of the general Moore
trophy is points awarded through intervals. So
we, in trying to offer a diverse program, we put too
many points on the points system, then we had to
back off a little bit. And it's primarily now the
four major sports plus the two meets that the Corps
is competing in. And they can compete in other
things, it's just not for points. But the problem
with the Corps, if we put it on the points system,
they have a team. And Senator Gere was
overextending that. And are the Corps sports
co-ed also? We have... I wish I knew the answer to
that. I know we started down that road. Whether
we're still doing it or not, I'm not sure. My
problem right now at Haskell is that we went from
eight years ago having 12, 13 people on staff, and
now we've got 50 people on staff. Sure, sure. I'm
having trouble keeping up with all that stuff.
Type us this next note. You can leave out. I just
want to share an anecdote with him. As of last fall,
I think this fall would also be the same, 5% of all
undergraduate males at UT were in fraternities,
6% females were in sororities. The percentages
here instead of 5 and 6 are 6 and 14. We have a higher
percentage of undergraduates in fraternity
sororities than UT. We have more corps members
than we, I mean more fraternity and sorority
members than we have members of the corps. And I
learned not long ago that three of last year's Yale
leaders who were corps members were also
fraternity members. And I hadn't thought about
that. So how things are shifting. You probably
recall before you left that there was a big deal
about fraternities, and especially amongst the
core. Oh, yeah. No, no. Then of all of the 54
four-year institutions in Texas, public and
private, only eight of those have an
undergraduate male majority. We're one of the
eight. So one of the shifts, and nobody can really
explain why, A higher percentage of young women
are going to college now than young men. We're
still, and we've had more entering freshmen the
last two falls who were women than men. but then we
got transfer uh menil coming in i think so what uh
but did i ask about some uh requests for sports that
y'all didn't want to offer some activities i can't
think of any others that you've just flatly turned
down one of the things that that we we have to do and
we've probably done a pretty good job over the
years is when we look at a sport you can take
football and make it flag football non-contact
and a fairly good game fairly safe game so you're
taking risk and managing it and putting it in a
context that everybody can play this game you try
to do that with we have tried to do that with sports
that people have an interest in. And there's some
things that we haven't quite figured out how to do
that. So we hate to say no. Sometimes we feel like we
have to. But we would rather say, well, let us work
on it. Let's see if we can figure out a way to make
this game rugby.
Which
sports have had more problems that cause you more
difficulty and which are the most free of
problems? Softball is probably the most free of
problems. It's more of a social game. People don't
get as excited about it in general. Basketball is
always the most contentious. that people are so
close together, there's a lot of physical contact
in basketball that the game basically says
there's
no physical contact. And it's hard to officiate,
hard to officiate . So that's probably the
toughest one. What kinds of injuries have, in
those 27 years, have you had to help with? A lot of
them. A lot of injuries. Basketball probably,
again, provides the most injuries, and most of
them are minor, so to speak. We have had very few
major injuries. I can't even tell you. When you
start having neck injuries and head injuries, we
had a female hit in the face with a softball off the
bat, and that's pretty close. That's some
reconstructive surgery. We had a few things like
that, but the majority of our injuries are turned
ankle, turned knees, then you have the blown out
knees, and you have the broken ankles. So there's
quite a variety, but there's a lot of injuries.
We're involved in a high risk, and our job is to try
to manage that risk. to a point where we aren't
taking college students who come here to get an
education and put them in a situation where they
can't go to school because of an injury. So we've
got to try to manage that stuff. All right. Go
through the presidents you've worked with and
indicate their apparent interest in intramurals
or lack thereof, beginning with Williams. Jack
Williams was here when it came in.
Because I was pretty young, I'm not sure if I knew we
had a relationship at that time. But most people
felt pretty good about him. He was very
supportive. I sure did. From what I could tell,
especially from John Colas, he was very pleased
with
me. Jarvis Miller. Jarvis Miller was wonderful.
He was so personable. Now whether he actually got
things accomplished for us or not, I'm not sure,
but he was very personal. He always made you feel
good about what you were doing. So that was kind of a
nice pat on the back all the time he got from Jarvis
Miller. Chuck Sampson then for a year. Chuck
Sampson was great. He was the guy, he was just the
opposite of Jarvis. He didn't have a lot of
personality on the surface, but I tell you what, he
was there helping you. He was a hard worker and he
understood what we did and I'm not sure where that
came from, but he understood. When I went, there
were a few times I had a chance to talk to him and he
understood things we were talking about. We
didn't have to explain it to him. He's a bright guy.
Very supportive. Then Frank Vanderburg. He was
not. Frank Vandiver, we'd have been better off if
he'd stayed at Rice. And I think our band told him
that one day down at Rice Stadium. And he and John
Coles didn't have a good relationship from what
I've heard. All I know is that it was not the best of
times for John, probably not the best of times for
us. But in reality, I was far enough removed that It
probably didn't hurt me much. See, I was his first
doctoral student. Nice guy, but he had no
experience at a public institution, except he did
his master's degree at Texas. He got his
undergraduate degree by examination. He never
went to class, an organized class, in his life
until he began his master's degree at age 16. Wow.
He finished his Ph.D. in two nine-month years at
Tulane Washington University, St. Louis, then
Rice, then here. Well, Tulane, Wash U, and Rice are
very different from here. And he didn't
understand this place. He didn't. He didn't
understand the need for Student Services
Division. See, he never. All right, and then I
believe Mobley. He was good. And he was another guy
that really made you feel good about what you were
doing for the university. And I still have a couple
of notes from him, different functions that we
were together on. And he was the kind of guy that
stopped me right at the note. And Dean Gage then was
the interim. Yeah, Dean Gage was really good, I
thought. I mean, very friendly guy, seemed to be
very supportive. He was great.
All right, then after Dean Gage, I believe Dr.
Bowen. Dr. Bowen was fantastic. Great. He and Dr.
Sutton have a good relationship. old findings
that your whole funny stability is so much better
than it was before. I think he's I think he's great
manager.
Super intelligent. Doesn't take him long to
understand an issue.
Doesn't have as much personality as some people
would like him to have. But when it gets down to the
real issue, can be very supportive. And has never
put me in a situation where I felt bad or felt like he
didn't support me. Sometimes he just forgets to
tell you that he does, maybe. I think student
affairs as a whole is 100% better off now than they
were 10 years ago. A lot of that has to do with Ray
Bowen. I think overall we're probably doing
better work, too. Now, you were officially
reporting to the Department of what used to be
Health and Physical Education. When did that
cease? It changed in 1980 when Carl Landis
retired, and I reported to Leonard Ponder, who was
the department head, and he reported to John
Koldus for intramurals for recreational sports
at that time. And then he reported to the dean for
the rest of the things that went on in the
department. And then when Leonard retired, I'm
trying to recall the year. That was when, and I
don't remember for sure, that was when we went
officially over to Student Affairs and did not
report to the... Actually, that may have been, we
may have been in that relationship until we moved
into this building. All right. Ninety-five. All
right, and then now? Now I report to... to Jan
Winifred, who was Associate Vice President for
Student Affairs. But still within Student
Affairs. Yeah. All right. Go through the years and
show the change in the number of staff. Oh, I wish my
memory was that good. We had, in 1973, another
little
story. As I, the way I recall this, I got a letter
later that said I was hired, but as I recall it, I
walked out of Carl Landis' office and he had
offered me the job. And at that point in time, the
department was, the Intermural Department was
the director, full-time secretary, and
full-time maintenance person. And we had some
student workers. Well, when we walked out of Carl
Landis' office and the office just outside of his
office, there's a gentleman named Jim Dieter. And
he said, by the way, let me introduce you to Jim
Dieter. He's your new assistant director. Brand
new position. Carl had already offered the job
before you offered the job to me, which is okay. And
Jim and I became great friends. He's a great, great
worker. Now, what was his primary task at that
time? At that time, You know, really the first year
we did everything together, because he was brand
new. He just finished his master's degree, but had
not worked in recreational sports specifically.
He'd been in physical education. So the first year
we did everything together, training officials,
everything. From that point on, I became a pretty
good delegator. He basically ran the program.
majority of the programming efforts that next
year and then after that we hired another person
see we went from so we started with four people our
budget was $50,000 hired Jim was the first one then
we hired Susan slider the next year in 1974 and we
hired John Meyer in 1975 I think it was
Then we hired some graduate assistantships and we
had a little trouble with graduate
assistantships because most of them were looking
for a recreation degree and we really didn't have
that here. So in 1980, I think was a big change, we
dropped our graduate assistantship positions
and hired three full-time people, which was a big
change, a big number in nearly one year. So we were
up to about in the mid 80s about 12 full-time
professionals and then some clerical staff. When
we started planning for staffing this facility
and the program related to it, we were at 21
full-time people. That's everybody.
Maintenance workers, support staff, and
professional staff. We're today at 50 staff. Most
of that growth happened with new programs and
increasing what we're doing with facility
management with the Student Recreation Center.
But the other part that really causes significant
growth is we, in 1998, took over the golf course.
1996 we took over the golf course yeah july of 96 we
took over the golf course and that added 10 people
so and in the the traditional recreational
intramural recreational sports side of the house
we went from five to 40 or four to 40 people so
tenfold and then we picked up the golf course and
now we're 50 full-time staff. Our budgets went
from $50,000 from 1973 to $9 million this year. And
the source of that funding? There's two primary
sources, student service fees, about $1.6
million, and recreational sports fee, which
raises about $4.7 million. All right, and both of
those are from students. Right. We generate the
rest of it. What are the sources of that
generation?
Intramural entry fees, about $85,000 a year.
Memberships, 300, 350,000. Memberships for this
facility, non-student members. Guest passes to
use this facility is about 180,000. I mean,
there's a long list. Aerobics is about 85,000.
Locker rental. Close to $100,000. The golf course
generated $840,000 this last year. Does the golf
course break even? We made money last year.
Really? The golf course has been generating some
pretty good money, but we've been slowly doing
some upgrades. So we had a plan going in red for
about four years in a row. We actually made money
this year, though. I can show you the bottom line in
this black. We kind of like it. We'll probably stay
there for a while now. In all, I think we generate
$2.3
million. Describe
how this facility came to be, the planning and the
key people and the steps to it and all that. Tell as
much of that story as you can. In 1987, actually we
put together a facility, a needs assessment
survey, send it out, get the materials back. And we
may have done that in the fall. We did the analysis
in January. And I was talking with John Coles. I
said, we have done this study. And at some point in
time, we really ought to go to the students and talk
to them about doing a referendum, too. At that
point in time, the state was not building any
facilities. This was 1987. we weren't going to get
any help from from uh dr mccandless at that time
because he didn't have any help to give us so we uh we
we talked about using student fees to build a
building he asked me to go speak to his two student
leader groups that he meets with and he's with them
every other week with two different groups when he
has dinner with them every tuesday night and went
and talked to them and we were talking about doing
it a year later and they said, no, let's do it now. So
we, and I don't remember all the names of the people
that were involved in that.
We had a great group of student leaders that we
worked with. I need some names in here. See, to me,
one of the pleasant things, pleasant realities,
because just like you, I came from another school
here, so I'm also a convert, is the comparatively
positive reaction of student leaders here, like
Fred Heath with the library. They endorsed
increasing their fee to keep upgrading the
library. And I'm thinking, hooray, hooray, that
kind of trust. They really are. Yeah, here's the
list.
These are the students that attend the meeting.
Mike Sims, student body president. David
McDowell, president of RHA. Carl Wilkinson,
Corps Commander. Bobby Beiser, president of the
MSC. Remember him? He's still around. Helen
Delafont, Carolyn Brown, graduate student
council, prison senior class. Marty Holmes, the
all-in-group. Frank Rhodes, University
Department Counsel, Scott Mandel, President of
Campus Studies, Warren Steffi, editor of the
battalion, and he was one of our biggest
supporters. Of course, it's unusual for a student
to be editor of the paper each year. Biggest
problem. And this is what year? 87? 87. We met with
student leaders on February 12, 1987. Now, you
invited them... Actually, they meet all the time.
They met all the time with Dr. Coles and they
invited me. I did this presentation. I said, we're
thinking about doing this referendum next year.
I'm taking it to the legislature the year after
that. And they said, let's do the referendum now.
So what that meant was. Do you remember the
approximate vote? Yes, I can tell you exactly.
62.8% in favor. My, my. So almost two to one. Yeah.
The interesting thing was we decided to do a,
instead of having the Student Senate put it on the
ballot, to do a petition. And that was part of, of
course, the advertising campaign in reality. So
we did this petition, got signatures. We had it
turned into Friday before spring break. That gave
us Monday, Tuesday, Wednesday, spring break to
plan our campaign and start putting materials
together. And then we had Monday through Friday,
and then Monday of the next week and Tuesday and
Wednesday, but polling was over Tuesday and
Wednesday, so we had those eight days to actually
do the campaign. What were the contentions of the
opponents? We really didn't have anybody come out
and form a no vote. In reality, I think some people
just were concerned that going from zero to 50
bucks, I'd say it's a pretty big increase. It's
interesting because we just had a referendum this
last spring and what we told the students
basically that we would like to be able to keep what
we have and in order to afford that we need to do
this. So we didn't offer them anything new and we
actually raised the price by $7. And
we had a 68% positive vote on that one. Now the fee
originally was to...